📖  Extend Operating a Managed Cluster doc (#6026)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/operate-cluster.md

# Operating a managed Cluster

The `spec.topology` field added to the Cluster object as part of ClusterClass allows changes made on the Cluster to be propagated across all relevant objects. This means the Cluster object can be used as a single point of control for making changes to the Cluster topology. 

A managed Cluster can be used to:
* [Upgrade a Cluster](#upgrade-a-cluster)

> `* [Scale a MachineDeployment](#scale-a-machinedeployment)
> * [Scale a ControlPlane](#scale-a-controlplane)
> * [Add a MachineDeployment](#add-a-machinedeployment)
> * [Rebase a Cluster to a different ClusterClass](#rebase-a-cluster)
> * [Use variables in a Cluster](#use-variables)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Scale a ControlPlane](#scale-a-controlplane)
* [Scale a MachineDeployment](#scale-a-machinedeployment)
* [Add a MachineDeployment](#add-a-machinedeployment)
* [Changing Cluster variables](#use-variables)
* [Rebase a Cluster to a different ClusterClass](#rebase-a-cluster)
```
Suggesting a slightly different order so we have examples about CP, then all the examples about MD, then the more advanced use cases

Author: I'd prefer to keep the CP below the MD examples as I feel like they're the more common usages, but I'll group the MDs at the top, followed by CP, then variables and rebase.

## Upgrade a Cluster

> Using a managed topology the operation to upgrade a Kubernetes cluster is a one-touch operation.

Reviewer 2: Hm we have a mismatch here (two lines below). The quickstart currently deploys a v1.23.3 cluster. 

As the quickstart aims to use the latest Kubernetes release for which kind images exist, it will probably almost never work as the source version for an upgrade example.

NAME                                                                             CLUSTER                   REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE     VERSION
machinedeployment.cluster.x-k8s.io/clusterclass-quickstart-linux-workers-XXXX    clusterclass-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   7m29s   v1.22.0
```

> ## Scale a MachineDeployment

Reviewer: Let make a short intro before getting into the example
```suggestion
## Scale a MachineDeployment
The `spec.topology` field can be used as a single point of control for all the MachineDeployment in your Cluster.
```
Same below

Reviewer: Also somewhere (at the end of the paragraph or in a dedicated paragraph) we should list the other changes we can do to an existing MD

> Assume we have created a CAPD cluster with ClusterClass and Kubernetes v1.23.3 (as documented in the [Quick Start guide]). Initially we should have a MachineDeployment with 3 replicas. Running
> ```bash 
> kubectl get machinedeployments
> ```
> Will give us:
> ```bash 
> NAME                                                            CLUSTER           REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE   VERSION
> machinedeployment.cluster.x-k8s.io/capi-quickstart-md-0-XXXX   capi-quickstart   3          3       3         0             Running   21m   v1.23.3
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume we have created a CAPD cluster with ClusterClass and Kubernetes v1.23.3 (as documented in the [Quick Start guide]). Initially we should have a MachineDeployment with 3 replicas.
```bash 
$ kubectl get machinedeployments
NAME                                                            CLUSTER           REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE   VERSION
machinedeployment.cluster.x-k8s.io/capi-quickstart-md-0-XXXX   capi-quickstart   3          3       3         0             Running   21m   v1.23.3
```
```

I think you can simplify like this, if you want

Author: I'm fine either way if we pick a pattern and stick to it - this is the sort of style we use in the quickstart so I think if we change it here we should change it there and see where else it might be better.

Reviewer 2: Up to you. I would slightly prefer having just one block vs. two as it just seems more concise to me .

Author: I'm going to resolve this, but I think for following along having the commands in separate blocks is better like in the start guide. I don't think it adds confusion to have these mixed up, but maybe there's a way, using backticks or something in MD, to make the difference between command and output clearer. I'll create a follow up issue.

We can scale up or down this MachineDeployment through the Cluster object by changing the replicas field under `/spec/topology/workers/machineDeployments/0/replicas`
The `0` in the above path refers to the position of the target MachineDeployment in the list of our Cluster topology. As we only have one MachineDeployment we're targeting the first item in the list under `/spec/topology/workers/machineDeployments/`.

To change this value with a patch:
```bash

> kubectl  patch cluster capi-quickstart --type json --patch '[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/topology/workers/machineDeployments/0/replicas",  "value": 1}]'

Reviewer 2: I think it would make it easier for readers to digest if we would also show the affected sections of the Cluster resource as YAML. With the current version they have to "calculate" that themselves by taking the resources from the quickstart and applying the patches on top.

Author: I'll add in a diff after each patch operation.

```
After a minute the MachineDeployment will have scaled down to 1 replica:

```bash
NAME                         CLUSTER           REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE   VERSION
capi-quickstart-md-0-d9rxm   capi-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   25m   v1.23.3
```

> ## Scale a ControlPlane

Reviewer: Same as above, let give a brief intro and list the other types of changes we can do on the CP

A similar process to that used to [scale a MachineDeployment](#scale-a-machinedeployment) can be used to scale a ControlPlane.

This is done by changing the ControlPlane replicase field at `/spec/topology/controlPlane/replica` in the Cluster object. The command is:

```bash 
kubectl  patch cluster capi-quickstart --type json --patch '[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/topology/controlPlane/replicas",  "value": 1}]'
```

> ## Add a MachineDeployment

Reviewer: Short intro + note about deleting MD

```

After a minute to scale the new MachineDeployment we get:
```bash
NAME                                      CLUSTER           REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE   VERSION
capi-quickstart-md-0-d9rxm                capi-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   39m   v1.23.3
capi-quickstart-second-deployment-d77h6   capi-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   99s   v1.23.3
```
Our second deployment uses the same underlying MachineDeployment Class as our initial deployment. In this case they will both have the exact same underlying machine templates. In order to modify the templates MachineDeployments are based on take a look at [Changing a ClusterClass].

## Rebase a Cluster
To perform more significant changes using a Cluster as a single point of control, it may be necessary to change the ClusterClass that the Cluster is based on. This is done by changing the class referenced in `/spec/topology/class`.

To read more about changing an underlying class please refer to [ClusterClass rebase]

> ## Use variables

Reviewer: Short intro about the effect of changing variables, that is achieving a slightly different variant of Cluster topology via ClusterClass patches

NAME                                                                             CLUSTER                   REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE     VERSION
machinedeployment.cluster.x-k8s.io/clusterclass-quickstart-linux-workers-XXXX    clusterclass-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   7m29s   v1.22.0
```

## Scale a MachineDeployment

> When using a managed topology scaling of MachineDeployments, both up and down, should be done through the Cluster topology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using a managed topology scaling of MachineDeployments, both up and down, is done through the Cluster topology.
```
Maybe, to make the statement a bit stronger. Scaling on the MachineDeployment will only work if `replicas` is not set in the topology.

In case we want to make that case visible here I think it would be good to make that more explicit. (maybe as a separate note with aside)

Author: 'Should' here isn't used in a conditional sense, but in an imperative sense. It's trying to tell the user what to do, not describing how the system works. If you feel strongly about it I can change it, but 'is' doesn't come across as an instruction here.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

The `0` in the path refers to the position of the target MachineDeployment in the list of our Cluster topology. As we only have one MachineDeployment we're targeting the first item in the list under `/spec/topology/workers/machineDeployments/`.

To change this value with a patch:
```bash
kubectl  patch cluster capi-quickstart --type json --patch '[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/topology/workers/machineDeployments/0/replicas",  "value": 1}]'
```

This patch will make the following changes on the Cluster yaml:
```diff
   spec:
     topology:
       workers:
         machineDeployments:
         - class: default-worker
           name: md-0
           metadata: {}
+          replicas: 1
-          replicas: 3
```
After a minute the MachineDeployment will have scaled down to 1 replica:

```bash
NAME                         CLUSTER           REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE   VERSION
capi-quickstart-md-0-XXXXX  capi-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   25m   v1.23.3
```

> As well as scaling a MachineDeployment, Cluster authors can edit the labels and annotations applied to a running MachineDeployment using the Cluster topology as a single point of control.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As well as scaling a MachineDeployment, Cluster operators can edit the labels and annotations applied to a running MachineDeployment using the Cluster topology as a single point of control.
```
Let's use Cluster operators (same below). Usually we use that as a persona in cases like this. We only used author for ClusterClass afaik.

```
This patch will make the below changes on the Cluster yaml:
```diff
   spec:
     topology:
       workers:
         machineDeployments:
         - class: default-worker
           metadata: {}
           replicas: 3
           name: md-0
+        - class: default-worker
+          metadata: {}
+          replicas: 1
+          name: second-deployment
```

After a minute to scale the new MachineDeployment we get:
```bash
NAME                                      CLUSTER           REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   PHASE     AGE   VERSION
capi-quickstart-md-0-XXXX                 capi-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   39m   v1.23.3
capi-quickstart-second-deployment-XXXX    capi-quickstart   1          1       1         0             Running   99s   v1.23.3
```
Our second deployment uses the same underlying MachineDeployment class `default-worker` as our initial deployment. In this case they will both have exactly the same underlying machine templates. In order to modify the templates MachineDeployments are based on take a look at [Changing a ClusterClass].

> A similar process described here - removing the machineDeployment from `cluster.spec.topology.workers.machineDeployments` - can be used to delete a running MachineDeployment from an active Cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A similar process as described here - removing the MachineDeployment from `cluster.spec.topology.workers.machineDeployments` - can be used to delete a running MachineDeployment from an active Cluster.
```
nit(I think)

## Scale a ControlPlane
When using a managed topology scaling of ControlPlane Machines, where the Cluster is using a topology that includes ControlPlane MachineInfrastructure, should be done through the Cluster topology.

> This is done by changing the ControlPlane replicase field at `/spec/topology/controlPlane/replica` in the Cluster object. The command is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is done by changing the ControlPlane replicas field at `/spec/topology/controlPlane/replica` in the Cluster object. The command is:
```

```bash 
kubectl  patch cluster capi-quickstart --type json --patch '[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/topology/controlPlane/replicas",  "value": 1}]'
```

This patch will make the below changes on the Cluster yaml:
```diff
   spec:
      topology:
        controlPlane:
          metadata: {}
+         replicas: 1
-         replicas: 3
```

As well as scaling a ControlPlane, Cluster authors can edit the labels and annotations applied to a running ControlPlane using the Cluster topology as a single point of control.

## Use variables

> A ClusterClass can use variables and patches in order to allow flexible customization of Clusters derived from a ClusterClass. Variable definition allows two or more Cluster topologies derived from the same ClusterClass to have different specs, with the differences defined in variables in the Cluster topology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ClusterClass can use variables and patches in order to allow flexible customization of Clusters derived from a ClusterClass. Variable definition allows two or more Cluster topologies derived from the same ClusterClass to have different specs, with the differences controlled by variables in the Cluster topology.
```
Maybe slightly more correct, as the differences are defined in the patches in the ClusterClass.

> Assume we have created a CAPD cluster with ClusterClass and Kubernetes v1.23.3 (as documented in the [Quick Start guide]). Our Cluster has a variable `etcdImageTag` as defined in the ClusterClass. The variable is not set our Cluster. Some variables, depending on their definition in a ClusterClass, may need to be specified by the Cluster operator for every Cluster created using a given ClusterClass.

Author: Missing 'on' thanks!

> Assume we have created a CAPD cluster with ClusterClass and Kubernetes v1.23.3 (as documented in the [Quick Start guide]). Our Cluster has a variable `etcdImageTag` as defined in the ClusterClass. The variable is not set our Cluster. In this case `etcdImageTag` is using a default value defined in the ClusterClass but not all variables will have a default value defined. Some variables, depending on their definition in a ClusterClass, may need to be specified by the Cluster author for every Cluster created using a given ClusterClass..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume we have created a CAPD cluster with ClusterClass and Kubernetes v1.23.3 (as documented in the [Quick Start guide]). Our Cluster has a variable `etcdImageTag` as defined in the ClusterClass which is currently not set. In this case `etcdImageTag` is using a default value defined in the ClusterClass but not all variables will have a default value defined. Some variables, depending on their definition in a ClusterClass, may need to be specified by the Cluster author for every Cluster created using a given ClusterClass.
```
(please note the double trailing dot at the end)

Reviewer 2: Hm, it's not really correct that the default value is used. The variable etcdImageTag is set to an empty string (and the default would be an empty string too, but is not used).
Maybe we should remove that remark about defaults?

In order to specify the value of a variable all we have to do is set the value in the Cluster topology. 

We can see the current unset variable with:
```bash 
kubectl get cluster capi-quickstart -o jsonpath='{.spec.topology.variables[1]}'                                                                     

```
Which will return something like:
```bash
{"name":"etcdImageTag","value":""}
```

In order to run a different version of etcd in new ControlPlane machines - the part of the spec this variable sets - change the value using the below patch:
```bash 
kubectl  patch cluster capi-quickstart --type json --patch '[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/topology/variables/1/value",  "value": "3.5.0"}]'
```

Running the patch makes the following change to the Cluster yaml:
```diff
   spec:
     topology:
       variables:
       - name: imageRepository
         value: k8s.gcr.io
       - name: etcdImageTag
         value: ""
       - name: coreDNSImageTag

> +        value: "3.5.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+        value: "3.5.0"
```

-        value: ""

```
Retrieving the variable value from the Cluster object, with `kubectl get cluster capi-quickstart -o jsonpath='{.spec.topology.variables[1]}'` we can see:
```bash
{"name":"etcdImageTag","value":"3.5.0"}
```
Note: Changing the etcd version may have unintended impacts on a running Cluster. For safety the cluster should be reapplied after running the above variable patch.

## Rebase a Cluster
To perform more significant changes using a Cluster as a single point of control, it may be necessary to change the ClusterClass that the Cluster is based on. This is done by changing the class referenced in `/spec/topology/class`.

> To read more about changing an underlying class please refer to [ClusterClass rebase]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To read more about changing an underlying class please refer to [ClusterClass rebase].
```
